So how do you function calls work functions using area in memory called the function call stack or program
stack.
A stack is analogous to a stack of books or a stack of dishes.
If you place a book on top of the stack then you must remove that book before removing any others.
This is referred to as last in first out or Life'll stacks also use the terms push when you put an item
on top of the stack and pop.
When you remove an item from the top of the stack in the case of a C++ program these items are called
stack frames or activation records.
All it is is a collection of information that represents an active function.
So this is where parameters are stored local variables the return address and more each time a function
is called an activation record is created and it's pushed onto the call stack when the function terminates.
We poppets activation record off the call stack and now the top of the stack is the function that is
called The one we just popped off the call stack works in a very orderly manner.
You can't jump into or out of the middle of the stack.
You must follow the Life'll rules.
Also remember that the call stack is finite in size.
If you activate too many functions on the call stack then it's possible to run out of stack space.
This results in a stack overflow error which is usually an unrecoverable error.
Your program will terminate.
The best way to understand how function calls work is to show you visually.
Let's do that now in order to understand how function calls work.
We really need to understand how memory is laid out here.
Let's say that this is the memory for our program.
It's divided into segments So here we've got the code area.
This is where the code resides.
Then we've got an area for static variables or for global variables.
That's where they're stored right here.
And here is the area for the stack.
This is the function call stack and this is what we're really concerned about in this video.
So this is the area I'm going to concentrate on in this video.
Then we've got another area in memory here called the heap or the Freestore.
We'll talk a lot about this area when we talk about pointers and dynamic memory allocation.
So in this video keep in mind that what I'm talking about is this area right here that's the function
call stack.
So when we call functions and they finish and they pop off the stack.
This is what we're talking about this area in memory right here.
OK so I mean the idea and I'm in the section 11 workspace in the how function calls work project and
I've got a real simple example here that I'm going to walk through in detail in a second but before
I do that let's concentrate and look and what typically happens when one function calls another.
So I've written it out here and this is not the only way to achieve this.
There's a lot of different ways to get to the same end.
But this is what typically happens so I suppose I have a main and that main calls a function called
func one.
That's what's happening here I've got Main and it's calling phunk one.
And what happens well.
Main it pushes space on the stack.
Remember everything is based on the stack for the return value that function func one is going to return
something to main main is the one that needs to get that result.
Once that function is done I need to push space for the parameters that are being passed in if any in
this case we've got to right here X and Y and we need to push the return address.
That's important because function one needs to know where to come back to.
Then we transfer control over to function one which is basically an assembly language instruction called
Jump.
You just jump over there and you're off and running.
So control is transferred.
Now one function and one side it pushes the address of the previous activation record.
That's basically moving a stack pointer.
That way you know where the top of the stack is.
You push any register values that need to be restored.
Then you perform the code in function one when the code is finished you restore the register values
that way Main is where it was before you restore the previous activation record right.
You basically pop all this stuff off the stack.
You store any function result where main wants it.
You can see main gave you the address and you transfer control back to main.
So you jump back to that return address that main pushed on main side.
Now remember function 1 is now done so main knows where the parameters are.
It knows where the return values are.
So it needs to pop that information off the stack to clear up the stack and also grab those values if
it can.
OK so this is the general flow.
We're not going to cover all the details here.
I'm more interested in the parameter side of it.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to walk through this example and I'll draw a function call stack
over here and we'll go through it in detail so you can see exactly what's going on from the parameter
perspective.
I'm not going to worry about stack pointers and static links and dynamic links and all the stuff that's
on an activation record but more generally Let's worry about the parameter passing so you can really
understand what's going on because it's important to understand this especially when we learned about
recursion later on.
OK so let's walk through this example.
Program execution starts at two main.
So main is going to be activated it's got a function activation record because it is a function.
So let's assume here Main is on the stack already and Main has an X.
It's got a Y and it's got a Z.
So we need space for those local variables.
You can see X is initialized to 10 y is initialized to 20 and Z is 0 in this case OK.
So now Maine is right here and we're executing this piece of code z equals function one with x y.
So we're calling function 1.
So what happens is main stops what it's doing it allocates space for X Y and I'm just going to do this
conceptually so we don't waste a lot of time know diddling with the stack and pointers and things.
But let's suppose that at this point we get we're going to push an activation record on here for function
one.
And if this is a little different from the example I showed you that I just walk through but it's a
little easier to draw.
So this is where we're at.
So now we're at function one function one is now on the stack and we need space for a b and result.
OK.
So let's say we've got a we've got B and we've got result.
We're doing pass by value here.
So what's going to happen is the X hooks up with DA and the y hooks up with the BE RIGHT.
There's your actual formal correspondence here.
So X is 10 and that goes copied into the A.
Why is 20 in this case so we're going to copy that to the B.
OK.
So this is where we're at right now.
Now let me clear up a little bit of this up.
All right so that's where we're at now.
Now we start executing this function function 1.
So it's going to add a and b.
Ok so that would be 20 plus 10.
So this gives me a 30 and it's going to store that value into result right here.
So now result gets a 30 originally result was 0 right because I zeroed it out here I did write it on
here but you get the idea here.
Now we're going to call function 2 and we're going to pass in result a and b.
So again let's stop what we're doing here we need to come back and finish this code.
So we're here and now we're activating function to and all along those stack pointers and moving along
here.
This is the part that I'm not going to worry about drawing here.
So now we're in function too.
We need space for X Y and Z.
But notice X is a reference parameter.
OK so we'll have to deal with that.
So we've got X Y and Z.
All right.
So let's do X Y and Z.
All right let's do Y and Z first.
We're going to pass those by value what is y and z.
Well we've got three here we've got result which is the corresponding to X a corresponds to Y and B
corresponds to Z.
Right.
So y gets the value of a the value that was 10.
So why is going to get 10 and Z gets the value of B.
B was 20 Z's going to be 20.
K now let's talk about that reference parameter.
Remember what we talked about reference primers we said that there were aliases right.
So in this case x is an alias for result right here.
So X is an alias for result.
So any changes I make to X result will be updated.
Right.
Because that's the whole idea.
That's the whole point of pass by reference.
Now we started executing this code.
The code says X equals x.
Plus y plus Z.
That's what that means right there.
OK so we've got Y and Z here which are 10 and 20 this becomes 10 plus 20.
And then what's X where X is a reference to.
Result.
Result is 30 so we're going to grab the 30 and add those two together that gives us 60.
So now we're going to say X equals 60.
Well again x is an alias for result.
So what we're doing is we're updating that guy to 60 right here OK.
Now function 2 is done.
So what happens.
It gets popped off the stack.
So let's do that.
So function 2 is now gone from here.
All that's gone.
I'm back in function one well-worded function one leave off that left off right here.
We're back from the function call now.
So it needs to return result which results 60 was it a return result to right here.
Remember result right there is the result of that function call.
So what I'm going to do here is I'm basically in the say z equals 60.
So that's what's happening here.
I'm popping off the stack now.
So function one is done all this is gone.
I'm back to Main and all main has to do is that one out put statement right here which displays z and
z is now 60.
And the program's done.
So this gives you an idea of conceptually what's going on with function calling.
Now I skipped a lot of these steps here on purpose because there's a lot to draw on it gets really really
cluttered.
But think about all this as function call overhead you really don't have to worry about pushing registers
and you know transferring control and all that's done for you by the compiler.
But there is a certain amount of function call overhead here.
So let's run this program and see that we indeed get to 60 and there it is there's a result.
There are 60.
OK so hopefully this works we'll do this again when we talk about recursion and that's when a function
calls a function calls a function calls itself.
So it's really important to understand what's going on with the stack call frame so we really know what's
what's being passed and what's being returned.
And you can see here that if we don't have a way to unwind to get back to where we were we could just
really just you know run out of memory and get a stack overflow where.